Closes #2897 ADAB Vignette (#2897)
pharmaverse/admiral: vignettes/adab.Rmd

---
title: "Creating an ADAB ADaM"
output: 
  rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Creating an ADAB ADaM}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)

library(admiraldev)
```

# Introduction

NOTE: This is document is in a draft state, still in the works by author 
and/or user feedback.

This article describes creating an Anti-Drug Antibody (ADA) ADaM (ADAB).
The first part of the article describes the data staging, second part
describes the methods of computation of parameters, the third part describes
assembling he final data set into by visit and parametee based records 

> then adding final flags, ADSL variables then compute ASEQ.

Author: OK.

Note: It should be noted at this point that CDISC does not currently have
an model or implementation guide for ADA (ADAMB). There is a committee and the
elements of this template reflect methods from a couple members and can serve
as a baseline for when a guide is released.  CDISC ADaM conventions and similar

> domains (such as ADPC) are followed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
domains (such as `ADPC`) are followed.
```

Author: OK.

This example presented uses underlying `EX` and `IS` domains where the
`EX` and `IS` domains represent data as collected and the `ADAB` ADaM is
output. For purposes of the examples, the surrogate data for ADA is called
'IS_ADA'.  IS_ADA is a product of the pharmaverse IS_ADA data.  The 'IS'
domain is intended die multiple classes of findings so a dedicated 'IS_ADA' was
added to the pharmaversesdtm for ADA data.

One of the important aspects of the dataset is the separate derivation of
original 'by visit' data, by visit interpreted results and parameter variables

> (like ADEX summary parameters).  A good analogy would be ADEX that has a mix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(like `ADEX` summary parameters). A good analogy would be `ADEX` that has a mix
```

## Read in Source Data {#readdata}

To start, all data frames needed for the creation of `ADAB` should be
read into the environment. This could be a company specific process. 
Data frames needed likely will be `IS`, `EX`, and `ADSL`.

Additional domains such as `VS` and `LB` may be used for additional
baseline variables if needed. These may come from either the SDTM or
ADaM source.

For the purpose of example, the CDISC Pilot SDTM and ADaM
datasets---which are included in `{pharmaversesdtm}`---are used.

```{r message=FALSE}
library(admiral)
library(dplyr)
library(lubridate)
library(stringr)
library(pharmaversesdtm)

ex <- pharmaversesdtm::ex
is <- pharmaversesdtm::is_ada
adsl <- admiral::admiral_adsl

ex <- convert_blanks_to_na(ex)
is <- convert_blanks_to_na(is)

# ---- Lookup tables ----
param_lookup <- tibble::tribble(
  ~PCTESTCD, ~PARAMCD, ~PARAM, ~PARAMN,
  "XAN", "XAN", "Pharmacokinetic concentration of Xanomeline", 1,
  "DOSE", "DOSE", "Xanomeline Patch Dose", 2,
)

# Similar to ADEX, assign a value for parameterized summary records
# Suggested are AVISIT=OVERALL, AVISITN=11111
overall_avisit <- "OVERALL"
overall_avisitn <- 11111
```

> At this step, we first adjust for whether our source data is IS using SDTM v2.0 standard

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this step, we first adjust for whether our source data is `IS` using SDTM v2.0 standard
```

> or pre SDTM v1.8.  Version 2.0 replaced ISTESTCD and ISTEST with general ADA categories,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or pre SDTM v1.8. Version 2.0 replaced ISTESTCD and ISTEST with general ADA categories,
```

what was stored in pre-version 1.8 in ISTESTCD or ISTEST is now stored in IS.ISBDAGNT.
This code provide a mechanic so process either version, see below comments for usage.

ADAPARM and ADATYPE are assigned to assure consistent merge var as values are calculated
in the event IS from pre version 2.0 are used. IS.ISTESTCD, and IS.ISBDAGNT from version 2.0
could be substituted if desired.

> DRUG (similar to ADPC.DRUG) is an assigned variable so IS Analytes can be merged matching 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`DRUG` (similar to `ADPC.DRUG`) is an assigned variable so `IS Analytes` can be merged matching 
```

> EX.EXTRT value(s) for purpose of computing reference dose and time from first dose.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EX.EXTRT` value(s) for purpose of computing reference dose and time from first dose.
```

Common variables as such AVISIT, AVISITN, FRLTU are assigned.  

NFRLT is nominal time from first dose. Common sources are IS.VISITDY. IS.VISIT information can
also be for all values or to get unplanned visits (i.e. 'End of Study', 'Unscheduled').

We use `derive_vars_merged()` is used to merge ADSL.TRTSDT to compute ADY.  ADY is assumed to be
based on the ADSL.TRTSDT while ADAB.AFRLT is based on the matching EX.EXTRT for the corresponding 
IS analyte.

> If IS.ISDTC is missing the time part, 00:00 is used for the impute.  Individual companies and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `IS.ISDTC` is missing the time part, "00:00" is used for the imputation. Individual companies and 
```

studies may have custom impute methods.  If this is the case, the` derive_vars_dtm()`
would be either replaced or post-processed to get the desired imputed time part. For example,
a common method is to use EX.EXSTDTC time part (match merged by IS and EX date parts) 

> then IS time is adjusted for pre-dose sampling planned time.  User would add custom code for this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
then the `IS` time is adjusted for pre-dose sampling planned time. User would add custom code for this.
```

    NFRLT = case_when(
      str_detect(toupper(VISIT), "EARLY DISC") ~ 77777,
      str_detect(toupper(VISIT), "TREATMENT DISC") ~ 77777,
      str_detect(toupper(VISIT), "UNSCHEDULED") ~ 99999,
      !is.na(VISITDY) ~ (VISITDY - 1),
      TRUE ~ NA_real_
    )
  ) %>%
  # Join ADSL with is (need TRTSDT for ADY derivation)
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(TRTSDT),
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID)
  ) %>%
  # Derive analysis date/time then compute ADY
  # Impute missing time to 00:00:00 or as desired.
  #   Could replace this code with own imputation code or function
  derive_vars_dtm(
    new_vars_prefix = "A",
    highest_imputation = "s",
    dtc = ISDTC,
    ignore_seconds_flag = FALSE,
    time_imputation = "00:00:00"
  ) %>%
  # Derive dates and times from date/times
  derive_vars_dtm_to_dt(exprs(ADTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_dtm_to_tm(exprs(ADTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_dy(reference_date = TRTSDT, source_vars = exprs(ADT))
```

## Prepare 'EX', Find First Dose and Derive AFRLT {#firstdose}

At this step, we stage 'EX' data. Filter the data as desired to match 
the 'IS' analytes. As with 'IS', DRUG is assigned as a common merge var.

> As with 'IS', NFRLT is assigned using VISITDY (or the user could substitute

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As with 'IS' dataset, `NFRLT` is assigned using `VISITDY` (or the user could substitute
```

> EX.VISIT values).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`EX.VISIT` values).
```

Assign ASTDTM using EX.EXSTDTC.   As with IS.ISDTC, If EX.EXSTDTC is missing the time part,
00:00 is used for the impute.   Individual companies and studies may have custom impute methods.
If this is the case  the` derive_vars_dtm()` would be either replaced or post-processed to 
get the desired imputed time part. For example a common method is to use IS.ISDTC time part 
(match merged by IS and EX date parts) then EX missing time is adjusted for 
pre-dose sampling planned time. User would add custom code for this.
AENDTM from EX.EXENDTC is also computed in case needed.  Both dates then create
date part variables using `derive_vars_dtm_to_dt()`

```{r message=FALSE}
ex_dates <- ex %>%
  # Keep applicable desired records based on EXTRT and/or dose values (>=0, >0, etc.)
  filter(
    str_detect(toupper(EXTRT), "XANOMELINE") | str_detect(toupper(EXTRT), "PLACEBO"),
    EXDOSE >= 0
  ) %>%
  mutate(

>     # DRUG is a merge var to map and merge ADA data with EX.EXTRT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    # DRUG is a merge variable to map and merge ADA data with EX.EXTRT
```

    time_imputation = "00:00:00"
  ) %>%
  # Set missing end dates to start date or as desired
  mutate(
    AENDTM = if_else(is.na(AENDTM), ASTDTM, AENDTM)
  ) %>%
  # Derive dates from date/times
  derive_vars_dtm_to_dt(exprs(ASTDTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_dtm_to_dt(exprs(AENDTM))
```

At this step, we use `derive_vars_merged()` to join our prepared 'EX' data into the prepared
'IS' data to compute FANLDTM, AFRLT and keep FANLTMF from ASTTMF in case the first dose
was imputed.

```{r message=FALSE}
# Derive AFRLT in IS data
is_afrlt <- is_dates %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = ex_dates,
    filter_add = (EXDOSE >= 0 & !is.na(ASTDTM)),
    new_vars = exprs(FANLDTM = ASTDTM, FANLTMF = ASTTMF),
    order = exprs(ASTDTM, EXSEQ),
    mode = "first",
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID, DRUG)
  ) %>%
  derive_vars_dtm_to_dt(exprs(FANLDTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_dtm_to_tm(exprs(FANLDTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_duration(
    new_var = AFRLT,
    start_date = FANLDTM,
    end_date = ADTM,
    out_unit = "days",
    floor_in = FALSE,
    add_one = FALSE
  ) %>%
  arrange(STUDYID, USUBJID, DRUG, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, ADTM, NFRLT)
```

## Assign Periods, Phases and BASETYPE {#basetype}

> At this step compute or assign applicable APERIOD, APHASE and/or BASETYPE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this step compute or assign applicable `APERIOD`, `APHASE` and/or `BASETYPE` variables.
```

Note: In ADAB, BASETYPE is Phase or Period but the method for assigning BASE
could be appended to BASETYPE (i.e. "DOUBLE_BLINDED LAST"). 
BASETYPE is carried though through the remaining steps of this template as a by 

> variable for computing parameters.  For example, if there is main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variable for computing parameters. For example, if there is a main
```

phase and a later maintenance phase, you might want to compute all the ADA 
parameters by BASETYPE.  If re-base lining does not occur a later phase, the 
BASE from the first phase could be appended to the main data and adjust the 
BASETYPE construct with a key word to explain this.

```{r message=FALSE}
# Compute or assign BASETYPE, APERIOD and APHASE ----------------------------------
# Add study specific code as applicable using ADEX or ADSL APx and PHx vars

is_basetype <- is_afrlt %>%
  mutate(
    APERIOD = 1,
    APERIODC = "Period 01",
    APHASE = NA_character_,
    APHASEN = NA_integer_,
    BASETYPE = "DOUBLE_BLINDED"
  )
```

At this step, we assign MRT (Minimum Reportable Titer) and an Optional
DTL (both are user/protocol specific assigned values).  RESULTC is the

> the standard interpreted result (POSITIVE or NEGATIVE) based valued found

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the standard interpreted result (`POSITIVE` or `NEGATIVE`) based values found
```

in IS.ISSTRESC (these values will be sponsor specific as applicable, starter
values supplied to demonstrate.). RESULTN is assigned 0/1 as the numeric version for RESULTC.
RESULTN and RESULTC are pre-cursors to AVAL and AVALC and serve as interim stores
to aid with user review of the progression of the program.

When IS.ISSTERC is "POSITIVE",  IS.ISSTRESN is commonly populated with values >0. 

> However, If ISSTRESC is "POSITIVE" with a missing IS.ISSTRESN, this template provides

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if `ISSTRESC` is "POSITIVE" with a missing `IS.ISSTRESN`, this template provides
```

      toupper(RESULTC) == "POSITIVE" & ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & is.na(ISSTRESN) &
        (str_detect(ISSTRESC, "<") | str_detect(toupper(ISSTRESC), "NEGATIVE TITER")) &
        !is.na(MRT) ~ paste("<", as.character(MRT), sep = ""),
      # If positive with no numeric ISSTRESN set to N.C.
      toupper(RESULTC) == "POSITIVE" & ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" ~ "N.C.",
      toupper(RESULTC) == "NEGATIVE" & ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" ~ NA_character_,
      TRUE ~ NA_character_
    ),
    AVALU = case_when(
      ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" ~ ISSTRESU,
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & toupper(RESULTC) == "POSITIVE" & !is.na(ISSTRESN) ~ ISSTRESU,
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & toupper(RESULTC) == "POSITIVE" & is.na(ISSTRESN) & !is.na(MRT)
      ~ "titer",
      TRUE ~ NA_character_
    ),
    DTYPE = case_when(
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & toupper(RESULTC) == "POSITIVE" & is.na(ISSTRESN) & !is.na(MRT) ~ "MRT",
      TRUE ~ NA_character_
    )
  )
```

## Derive Analysis Variables {#analysis}

IN this first section, we compute ABLFL, BASE and CHG.
VALIDBASE and VALIDPOST are assigned to accommodate if sponsor has restrictions
to use directly or use later to qualify a record as baseline or post-baseline

> as analysis variables are computed.  For example, a missing value at baseline

Author: Done.

    )
  ) %>%
  arrange(STUDYID, USUBJID, DRUG, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, ADTM, NFRLT)

# Compute BASE and CHG
is_aval_change <- is_baseline %>%
  derive_var_base(
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM),
    source_var = AVAL,
    new_var = BASE,
    filter = ABLFL == "Y"
  ) %>%
  restrict_derivation(
    derivation = derive_var_chg,
    filter = is.na(ABLFL)
  )

# Interpreted Result Baseline
is_result_change <- is_aval_change %>%
  derive_var_base(
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM),
    source_var = RESULTN,
    new_var = BASE_RESULT,
    filter = ABLFL == "Y"
  )

# Get base only data for use later ina  FULL JOIN.
base_data <- is_result_change %>%
  filter(ABLFL == "Y") %>%
  select(
    !!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), DRUG, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, BASE_RESULT, BASE,
    ABLFL
  )
```

This section computes main ADA analyte parameters into a horizontal dataset.
Sections are commented appropriately. 
Final Key Variables this section:
Subject By Visit analysis variables (sponsor or molecule specific or optional)
TFLAGV - By visit Treatment Emergent Category (see *T-Flags).

> PBFLAGV - Post Baseline Status y Visit

Author: Corrected for next update.

> PBFLAGV - Post Baseline Status y Visit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PBFLAGV - Post-Baseline Status y Visit
```

  mutate(
    ADPBLPFL = "Y"
  )

# Compute BFLAG, TFLAG, PBFLAG ------------------

most_post_result <- post_data %>%
  group_by(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), DRUG, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM) %>%
  summarize(RESULT_P = max(RESULT_P)) %>%
  ungroup()

most_post_aval <- post_data %>%
  filter(!is.na(AVAL_P)) %>%
  group_by(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM) %>%
  summarize(AVAL_P = max(AVAL_P)) %>%
  ungroup()

most_post_chg <- post_data %>%
  filter(!is.na(AVAL_P)) %>%
  group_by(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM) %>%
  summarize(MAXCHG = max(CHG)) %>%
  ungroup()

# Merge the most_post_result, most_post_aval and most_post_chg into one utility data set
most_post <- most_post_result %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = most_post_aval,
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM)
  ) %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = most_post_chg,
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM)
  )

# Use an outer Join to combine baseline with most post results create utility dataset with flag data

> flagdata_init <- full_join(base_data, most_post, by = c(

Reviewer: base_data dataset is used only from here while its use is described at line 527. Is it necessary at line 527 or could it be explained further more?

  "DRUG", "STUDYID", "USUBJID", "BASETYPE",
  "ADATYPE", "ADAPARM"
)) %>%
  mutate(
    BFLAG =
      case_when(
        BASE_RESULT == 0 ~ 0,
        BASE_RESULT == 1 ~ 1,
        TRUE ~ NA_integer_
      ),
    TFLAG =
      case_when(
        (BFLAG == 0 | is.na(BFLAG)) & RESULT_P == 0 ~ 0,
        (BFLAG == 0 | is.na(BFLAG)) & RESULT_P == 1 ~ 1,
        BFLAG == 1 & (MAXCHG >= 0.6) ~ 2,
        BFLAG == 1 & !is.na(MAXCHG) & (MAXCHG < 0.6) ~ 3,
        BFLAG == 1 & is.na(MAXCHG) & RESULT_P == 0 ~ 3,
        TRUE ~ NA_integer_
      ),
    PBFLAG =
      case_when(
        ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & (TFLAG == 1 | TFLAG == 2) ~ 1,
        ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & (TFLAG == 0 | TFLAG == 3) ~ 0,
        ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & RESULT_P == 0 ~ 0,
        ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & RESULT_P == 1 ~ 1,
        TRUE ~ NA_integer_
      ),
    ADASTAT = case_when(
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & PBFLAG == 1 ~ 1,
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & PBFLAG == 0 ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    )
  ) %>%

>   arrange(DRUG, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, !!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), )

Author: Agreed. Corrected for next update.

```

In this section, we compute Neutralizing Antibody (Nab) Status (optional and if applicable).
Nab is typically obtained from samples where the subject has positive finding for its 
parent main analyte.  Reminder that ADA and Nab are drug specific.  Drug ABC can have ADA
and optional Nab tests; Drug XYZ can also have the same pairs and are processed separately.

The target variable for Nab is NABSTAT (subject Nab Status for the the matching parent analyte)
In the example template, to be NABSTAT = "Positive" or "Negative", the subject has to 

> ADATAT="Positive" on the main parent matching analyte. If not ADASTAT  = Positive,  NABSTAT is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ADATAT="Positive"` on the main parent matching analyte. If not `ADASTAT  = "Positive"`, `NABSTAT` is 
```

set to either NA or 'MISSING" as desired.

```{r message=FALSE}
# Get overall ADASTAT status for computing NABSTAT

flagdata_adastat <- flagdata_init %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = flagdata_init,
    filter_add = ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB",
    new_vars = exprs(ADASTAT_MAIN = ADASTAT),
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), DRUG)
  )

# Compute NABPOSTMISS onto flag_data for NABSTAT
flagdata_nab <- flagdata_adastat %>%
  derive_var_merged_exist_flag(
    dataset_add = is_visit_flags,
    new_var = NABPOSTMISS,
    condition = is.na(ABLFL) & VALIDPOST == "N" & ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB",
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM)
  )

# Compute NAB Stat using both methods

> # Note: Options 2 added as a placekeeper starter method, adjust as needed for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Note: Option 2 added as a placekeeper starter method, adjust as needed for
```

#   study specific specs.
flagdata_final <- flagdata_nab %>%
  mutate(
    # For Option 1, if any post baseline NAB were blank without a Positive (NABPOSTMISS = Y),
    # NABSTAT = missing
    nabstat_opt1 = case_when(
      # Based on ADASTAT (EMERNEG/EMERPOS) and NAB results
      ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & ADASTAT_MAIN == 1 & RESULT_P == 1 ~ 1,
      ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & ADASTAT_MAIN == 1 & RESULT_P == 0 &
        (is.na(NABPOSTMISS) | NABPOSTMISS == "N") ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
    nabstat_opt2 = case_when(
      # Based on ADASTAT (EMERNEG/EMERPOS) Only.
      ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & ADASTAT_MAIN == 1 ~ 1,
      ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & ADASTAT_MAIN == 0 ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
  ) %>%
  # Drop variables no longer neded from flag_data before merging with main ADAB
  select(-BASE, -BASE_RESULT, -AVAL_P, -RESULT_P, -DRUG, -ABLFL)
```

In this section, we bring together all the prior section variables into a single horizontal dataset
then compute remaining analysis variables into a  final horizontal dataset 
by STUDYID, USUBJID, BASETYPE, ADATYPE (Nab or ADA), ADAPARM (Drug specific value for the Nab or ADA test)

> The subject level variable values are repeated on each VISIT/ISDTC by BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The subject level variable values are repeated on each `VISIT`/`ISDTC` by `BASETYPE`, `ADATYPE`, `ADAPARM`.
```

> The remaining pertinent analysis variables  computed in this section are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The remaining pertinent analysis variables computed in this section are:
```

FPPDT  - Date of first ADA Positive
LPPDT  - Date of Last ADA Positive
ADADUR - Duration of ADA (LPPDT - FPPDT)
TIMADA - Time to ADA Positive (from first dose)
INDUCED - Negative at Baseline to Positive Post-Baseline
ENHANCED - Positive at Baseline to Positive Post-Baseline where CHG >= 0.60
TRANADA  - Transient ADA  (either of): 
             INDUCED and Positive at any Post Baseline other than Last

>              INDUCED and multiple post baseline positive (other than last)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             `INDUCED` and multiple post-baseline positive (other than last)
```

                and duration between first and last positive is < 16 weeks.
PERSADA -  Persistent ADA (either of):
             INDUCED and Positive at the last post baseline result.

>              INDUCED and multiple post baseline positive (other than last)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             `INDUCED` and multiple post-baseline positive (other than last)
```

                and duration between first and last positive is >= 16 weeks.
TRANADAE  - Any Treatment Emergent Transient ADA  (either of): 

>              INDUCED and Positive at any Post Baseline other than Last

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             `INDUCED` and Positive at any Post-Baseline other than last result
```

             INDUCED and multiple post baseline positive (other than last)
                and duration between first and last positive is < 16 weeks.
PERSADAE - Any Treatment Emergent Persistent ADA (either of):
             INDUCED or ENHANCED and Positive at the last post baseline result.
             INDUCED  or ENHANCED and multiple post baseline positive (other than last)
ADABLPFL - Baseline ADA Evaluable - Baseline test exists (ABLFL = Y)

> ADPBFPFL - Post Baseline ADA Evaluable - At least one Valid (non-missing) post-baseline result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ADPBFPFL` - Post-Baseline ADA Evaluable - At least one Valid (non-missing) post-baseline result.
```

      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
    PERSADA = case_when(
      TFLAGV == 1 & (COUNT_INC_LAST == 1 & (COUNT_EXC_LAST <= 0 | is.na(COUNT_EXC_LAST)) |
        (COUNT_INC_LAST >= 2 & tdur >= 16) | LFLAGPOS == 1) ~ 1,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
    # These TRANADAE and PERSADAE based on TFLAGV = 1 or TFLAGV=2 (Induced or Enhanced)
    TRANADAE = case_when(
      TFLAGV >= 1 & ((COUNT_EXC_LAST == 1 | (COUNT_INC_LAST >= 2 & tdur < 16)) & is.na(LFLAGPOS)) ~ 1,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
    PERSADAE = case_when(
      TFLAGV >= 1 & (COUNT_INC_LAST == 1 & (COUNT_EXC_LAST <= 0 | is.na(COUNT_EXC_LAST)) |
        (COUNT_INC_LAST >= 2 & tdur >= 16) | LFLAGPOS == 1) ~ 1,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
    INDUCED = case_when(
      TFLAGV == 1 ~ "Y",
      TRUE ~ "N"
    ),
    ENHANCED = case_when(
      TFLAGV == 2 ~ "Y",
      TRUE ~ "N"
    )
  ) %>%
  # Drop temporary vars that do not need to be merged into main ADAB
  select(-ADTM, -TFLAGV, -FANLDTM, -FANLDT, -LFLAGPOS, -FPPDT, -LPPDT)

# Put PERSADA, TRANADA, INDUCED, ENHANCED, TDUR, ADADUR onto "is_flagdata" as "main_aab_pertran"

> #  Note: if get a signal_duplicate_records() error, then likely cause is  subject has a duplicate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Note: signal_duplicate_records() error usually occurs when a subject has duplicate
```

> #        record for a given BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM and ISDTC. Investigate then add code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#        records for a given BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM and ISDTC. Investigate then add code
```

main_aab_pertran <- is_flagdata %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = per_tran_final,
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM)
  )

main_aab_rtimes <- main_aab_pertran %>%
  mutate(
    ATPT = ISTPT,
    ADADUR = round(ADADUR, digits = 4),
    TIMADA = round(TIMADA, digits = 4),
    PERSADA = case_when(
      is.na(PERSADA) ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ PERSADA
    ),
    PERSADAE = case_when(
      is.na(PERSADAE) ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ PERSADAE
    ),
    TRANADA = case_when(
      is.na(TRANADA) ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ TRANADA
    ),
    TRANADAE = case_when(
      is.na(TRANADAE) ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ TRANADAE
    ),
    NABSTAT = nabstat_opt1
  )

# Merge ADABLPFL and ADPBFPFL onto main dataset.
main_aab <- main_aab_rtimes %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adablpfl,
    new_vars = exprs(ADABLPFL),
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM)
  ) %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adpblpfl,
    new_vars = exprs(ADPBLPFL),
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM)
  )
```

## Assemble into Parameter Based Dataset {#parameters}

> In this section, we turn original IS records, the duplicated interpreted records plus

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, we turn original `IS` records, the duplicated interpreted records plus
```

> each Analysis variable into separate prepared data frames.  These will then be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
each Analysis variable into separate prepared data frames. These will then be
```

      AVALC == "NEGATIVE" ~ 0,
      AVALC == "POSITIVE" ~ 1,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    ),
    AVALU = NA_character_
  ) %>%
  # These two flags, BASE and CHG are only kept on the primary ADA test
  select(-BASE, -CHG, -ADABLPFL, -ADPBLPFL)

# Derive BASE and Calculate Change from Baseline on NAB RESULT records
adab_nabres <- adab_nabres %>%
  derive_var_base(
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM),
    source_var = AVAL,
    new_var = BASE,
    filter = ABLFL == "Y"
  ) %>%
  restrict_derivation(
    derivation = derive_var_chg,
    filter = is.na(ABLFL)
  )

# By Visit Titer TFLAGV data -----------------------

# Note: By Visit parameters do not keep CHG, MRT and DTL
adab_tflagv <- core_aab %>%
  filter(ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB") %>%
  mutate(
    PARAMCD = "TFLAGV",
    PARAM = paste("Treatment related ADA by Visit,", PARCAT1, sep = " "),
    AVAL = TFLAGV,
    AVALC = as.character(AVAL),
    AVALU = NA_character_
  ) %>%
  # Drop BASE, CHG, MRT and DTL and the two --FL flags (are only kept on the primary ADA test)
  select(-BASE, -CHG, -MRT, -DTL, -ADABLPFL, -ADPBLPFL)

# By Visit Titer PBFLAGV data ---------------------

> # Note: By Visit parameters do not keep CHG, MRT and DTL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Note: By Visit parameters do not keep CHG, MRT and DTL variables
```

    ISTESTCD, ISTEST, ISCAT, ISBDAGNT, AVISITN, AVISIT, ISSPEC, FPPDTM
  ) %>%
  mutate(
    PARAMCD = "FPPDTMy",
    PARAM = paste("First Post Dose Positive Datetime,", PARCAT1, sep = " "),
    AVAL = (as.numeric(FPPDTM)),
    AVALC = if_else(is.na(FPPDTM), NA_character_,
      toupper(as.character(format(FPPDTM, "%d%b%Y:%H:%M:%S")))
    ),
    AVALU = NA_character_
  )

# Get Patient flag LPPDTM
adab_lppdtm <- core_aab %>%
  filter(ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB") %>%
  distinct(
    !!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"), PARCAT1, BASETYPE, PARAM, ADATYPE, ADAPARM,
    ISTESTCD, ISTEST, ISCAT, ISBDAGNT, AVISITN, AVISIT, ISSPEC, LPPDTM
  ) %>%
  mutate(
    PARAMCD = "LPPDTMy",
    PARAM = paste("Last Post Dose Positive Datetime,", PARCAT1, sep = " "),
    AVAL = as.numeric(LPPDTM),
    AVALC = if_else(is.na(LPPDTM), NA_character_,
      toupper(as.character(format(LPPDTM, "%d%b%Y:%H:%M:%S")))
    ),
    AVALU = NA_character_
  )
```

In this section, we set together the desired parameter data sets created in the prior section.
In this example, all are kept.  A specific study might not have Nab or need the by visit parameters (TFLAGV, PBFLAGV, ADASTATV)

> or need vars like ADADUR, LPPDTM and FPPDTM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or need variables like `ADADUR`, `LPPDTM` and `FPPDTM`.
```

# Merge in ADSL Values --------------------------------
adab_adsl <- adab_study %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"))
  )

# Compute COHORT From ADSL, other source could be ADSUB
adab_cohort <- adab_adsl %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(COHORT = ARMCD),
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"))
  )

# Compute ADAFL
# Other method could be ADSL.SAFFL, ADAB.ADPBLPFL by ISTESTCD, etc.
adab_adafl <- adab_cohort %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(ADAFL = SAFFL),
    by_vars = exprs(!!!get_admiral_option("subject_keys"))
  )
```

In this section we create a Tibble to map above PARAMCD and PARAM to final study spec values
This step is important as we want unique PARAMCD/PARAM values.  The number suffixes start 
with '1' and increment as the core parameter name is repeated. This could be due to having
RESULT for ADA and Nab for Drug ABC.  There could be two analytes/drug combos 
(ISBDAGNT is 'XANOMELINE' and ISBDAGNT is 'Y012345678').

After merging the 'adab_param_data', final adjustments are made to PARAMCD and PARAM values.

> The adjustments are dependent on whether IS is based on SDTM v2.0 or prior to v1.8.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These adjustments depend on whether `IS` is based on SDTM v2.0 or an earlier version (prior to v1.8).
```

> Last step is computing ASEQ.  ASEQ should be computed last since the sort key includes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Last step is computing `ASEQ`. `ASEQ` should be computed last since the sort key includes
```

    BASETYPE = "DOUBLE_BLINDED"
  )
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  is_basetype,
  display_vars = exprs(
    USUBJID, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, DRUG, VISIT, NFRLT, AFRLT
  )
)
```

## Derive Assigned Variables {#assigned}

At this step, we assign `MRT` (Minimum Reportable Titer) and an optional
`DTL` (Drug Tolerance Level onto the main ADA analyte records (`ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB"`).
Both are sponsor/protocol specific assigned values.  `RESULTC` is the the standard interpreted 
character result (`POSITIVE` or `NEGATIVE`) based values found in `IS.ISSTRESC` (these values will 
be sponsor specific as applicable, starter values are supplied to demonstrate). `RESULTN` is assigned `0`/`1` 
as the numeric version of `RESULTC`. `RESULTN` and `RESULTC` are precursors to `AVAL` and `AVALC` and 
will serve as interim variables to facilitate progression of the program and its derivations.

When `IS.ISSTRESC` is "POSITIVE", `IS.ISSTRESN` is commonly populated with values >0. 
However, if `ISSTRESC` is "POSITIVE" with a missing `IS.ISSTRESN`, this template provides
a method to assign `AVAL` using the assigned MRT value, sets `AVALC` to "N.C." (Not Calculable)

> and documents the operation by setting `DTYPE='MRT'`.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and documents the operation by setting `DTYPE = "MRT"`.  
```

    ),
    AVALU = NA_character_
  )
```

In this section, we set together the desired parameter data sets created in the prior section.
In this example, all are kept. A specific study might not have Nab or need the by visit parameters (`TFLAGV`, `PBFLAGV`, `ADASTATV`)
or need variables like `ADADUR`, `LPPDTM` and `FPPDTM`.

```{r message=FALSE}
# Set all the standard PARAM components together -----------------------------------

adab_paramcds <- bind_rows(
  adab_titer, adab_nabvis, adab_result, adab_nabres, adab_bflag,
  adab_incucd, adab_enhanc, adab_emerpos, adab_trunaff, adab_emerneg, adab_notrrel,
  adab_adastat, adab_timada, adab_persada, adab_tranada, adab_nabstat
)

# In this sample, also have BY VISIT parameters,
adab_visits <- bind_rows(adab_tflagv, adab_pbflagv, adab_adastatv)

# Create the final parameterized dataset --------------------------------------------

# To keep only standard parameters:
# adab_study <- adab_paramcds
# To include BY VISIT parameters and/or others:
adab_study <- bind_rows(adab_paramcds, adab_visits, adab_adadur, adab_fppdtm, adab_lppdtm)

# Drop temporary variables and ADA Flag variables that are now parameterized, further below is a

> # final 'select' statement to to customize the final select.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# final `select` statement to to customize the final select.
```

---
title: "Creating an ADAB ADaM"
output: 
  rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Creating an ADAB ADaM}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)

library(admiraldev)
```

# Introduction

This article describes creating an Anti-Drug Antibody (ADA) ADaM (`ADAB`).
The first part of the article describes the data staging, the second part
describes the methods of computation of parameters, the third part describes
assembling the final data set into by visit and parameter based records 
then adding final flags, ADSL variables then compute ASEQ.

Note: It should be noted at this point that CDISC does not currently have
a model or implementation guide for ADA (`ADAB`). This adab.R template

> is currently considered experimental.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note:  CDISC does not currently have a model or implementation guide for ADA (`ADAB`). This `adab.R` template is currently considered **experimental**.
```

More concise

editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

```{r setup, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)

library(admiraldev)
```

# Introduction

NOTE: This document is in a draft state, still in the works by author 
and/or user feedback.

This article describes creating an Anti-Drug Antibody (ADA) ADaM (`ADAB`).
The first part of the article describes the data staging, second part
describes the methods of computation of parameters, the third part describes
assembling the final data set into by visit and parameter based records 
then adding final flags, ADSL variables then compute ASEQ.

Note: It should be noted at this point that CDISC does not currently have
an model or implementation guide for ADA (ADAMB). There is a committee and the
elements of this template reflect methods from a couple members and can serve
as a baseline for when a guide is released.  CDISC ADaM conventions and similar
domains (such as `ADPC`) are followed.

This example presented uses underlying `EX` and `IS` domains where the
`EX` and `IS` domains represent data as collected and the `ADAB` ADaM is
output. For purposes of the examples, the surrogate data for ADA is called

> `IS_ADA`. `IS_ADA` is a product of the pharmaverse IS_ADA data. The `IS`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`IS_ADA`. `IS_ADA` is a product of the pharmaverse `IS_ADA` data. The `IS`
```

domain is intended for multiple classes of findings so a dedicated 'IS_ADA' was
added to the `{pharmaversesdtm}` for ADA data.

This template and the sample `IS` dataset works off of `IS` having primary

> Anti-Drug Antibody results (ex: `ISTESTCD` = 'ADA_BAB') and Neutralizing Antibody 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Anti-Drug Antibody results (ex: `ISTESTCD = "ADA_BAB"`) and Neutralizing Antibody 
```

> (ex:`ISTESTCD` = 'ADA_NAB') records present when 'ADA_BAB' has a positive finding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(ex:`ISTESTCD = "ADA_NAB"`) records present when `ADA_BAB` has a positive finding.
```

One of the important aspects of the dataset is the separate derivation of

> original 'by visit' data, by visit interpreted results and parameter variables

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
original "by visit" data, by visit interpreted results and parameter variables
```

(like `ADEX` summary parameters). A good analogy would be `ADEX` that has a mix
of original by visit records and summary records. These will be illustrated later
in this vignette.

Here are the relative time variables we will use for by visit records. These correspond to
the names in the CDISC Implementation Guide.

| Variable | Variable Label                         |
|----------|----------------------------------------|
| NFRLT    | Nom. Rel. Time from Analyte First Dose |
| AFRLT    | Act. Rel. Time from Analyte First Dose |

**Note**: *All examples assume CDISC SDTM and/or ADaM format as input
unless otherwise specified.*

# Programming Workflow

-   [Read in Source Data](#readdata)

> -   [Prepare 'EX', Find First Dose and Derive AFRLT](#firstdose)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   [Prepare `EX`, Find First Dose and Derive `AFRLT`](#firstdose)
```

# as NA values. Further details can be obtained via the following link:
# https://pharmaverse.github.io/admiral/cran-release/articles/admiral.html#handling-of-missing-values # nolint

ex <- convert_blanks_to_na(ex)
is <- convert_blanks_to_na(is)
adsl <- convert_blanks_to_na(adsl)

# Define values for records with overall values
# Suggested are AVISIT=Overall, AVISITN=11111
overall_avisit <- "OVERALL"
overall_avisitn <- 11111
```

```{r echo=FALSE}
ex <- filter(ex, USUBJID %in% c(
  "01-701-1015", "01-701-1023", "01-701-1442", "01-701-1034", "01-701-1133", "01-701-1028",
  "01-704-1008", "01-704-1017", "01-704-1093", "01-710-1249"
))
is <- filter(is, USUBJID %in% c(
  "01-701-1015", "01-701-1023", "01-701-1442", "01-701-1034", "01-701-1133", "01-701-1028",
  "01-704-1008", "01-704-1017", "01-704-1093", "01-710-1249"
))
```

At this step, we first adjust for whether our source data is `IS` using SDTM v2.0 standard
or pre SDTM v1.8. Version 2.0 replaced `ISTESTCD` and `ISTEST` with general ADA categories,
what was stored in pre-version 1.8 in `ISTESTCD` or `ISTEST` is now stored in `IS.ISBDAGNT`.
This code provides a mechanism to process either version, see below comments for usage.

> If your `IS` dataset has values in `ISTESTCD` and `ISTEST` different then the example (or has 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If your `IS` dataset has different values in `ISTESTCD` and `ISTEST` than the example (or has 
```

additional tests suitable for the `ADAB` domain), adjust this step accordingly. 

> `ADAPARM` and `ADATYPE` are assigned to assure consistent merge variables as values are calculated

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ADAPARM` and `ADATYPE` are assigned to ensure consistent merge variables as values are calculated
```

in the event `IS` from pre version 2.0 are used. `IS.ISTESTCD`, and `IS.ISBDAGNT` from version 2.0
could be substituted if desired.

`DRUG` (similar to `ADPC.DRUG`) is an assigned variable so `IS` Analytes can be merged matching 
`EX.EXTRT` value(s) for purpose of computing reference dose and time from first dose.

Common variables as such `AVISIT`, `AVISITN`, `FRLTU` are assigned.  

`NFRLT` is nominal time from first dose. Common sources are `IS.VISITDY`. `IS.VISIT` information can

> also be for all values or to get unplanned visits (i.e. 'End of Study', 'Unscheduled').

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
also be for all values or to get unplanned visits (i.e. "End of Study", "Unscheduled").
```

      str_detect(toupper(VISIT), "EARLY DISC") ~ 77777,
      str_detect(toupper(VISIT), "TREATMENT DISC") ~ 77777,
      str_detect(toupper(VISIT), "UNSCHEDULED") ~ 99999,
      !is.na(VISITDY) ~ (VISITDY - 1),
      TRUE ~ NA_real_
    )
  ) %>%
  # Join ADSL with is (need TRTSDT for ADY derivation)
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(TRTSDT),
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID)
  ) %>%
  # Derive analysis date/time then compute ADY
  # Impute missing time to 00:00:00 or as desired.
  # Could replace this code with custom imputation code or function
  derive_vars_dtm(
    new_vars_prefix = "A",
    highest_imputation = "s",
    dtc = ISDTC,
    ignore_seconds_flag = FALSE,
    time_imputation = "00:00:00"
  ) %>%
  # Derive dates and times from date/times
  derive_vars_dtm_to_dt(exprs(ADTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_dtm_to_tm(exprs(ADTM)) %>%
  derive_vars_dy(reference_date = TRTSDT, source_vars = exprs(ADT))
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  is_dates,
  display_vars = exprs(
    USUBJID, ISBDAGNT, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, DRUG, VISIT, ADTM, NFRLT
  )
)
```

## Prepare 'EX', Find First Dose and Derive AFRLT {#firstdose}

> At this step, we stage 'EX' data. Filter the data as desired to match 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this step, we stage `EX` data. Filter the data as desired to match 
```

the 'IS' analytes. As with 'IS' dataset, `DRUG` is assigned as a common merge variable.
As with 'IS' dataset, `NFRLT` is assigned using `VISITDY` (or the user could substitute
`EX.VISIT` values).

Assign `ASTDTM` using `EX.EXSTDTC`. As previously seen with `IS.ISDTC`, if `EX.EXSTDTC` is missing the time part,
"00:00" is used for the imputation. Individual companies and studies may have custom imputation methods.
If this is the case, the function `derive_vars_dtm()` would be either replaced or post-processed to 
get the desired imputed time part. For example a common method is to use the time part from `IS.ISDTC` 
(matched by the `IS` and `EX` date parts), then the `EX` missing time is adjusted for 
pre-dose sampling planned time. User would add custom code for this.

> AENDTM from EX.EXENDTC is also computed in case needed.  Both dates then create

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`AENDTM` from `EX.EXENDTC` is also computed in case needed.  Both dates then create
```

parameters. For example, if there is a main phase and a later maintenance phase, you might want to
compute all the ADA parameters by `BASETYPE`.

```{r message=FALSE}
# Compute or assign BASETYPE, APERIOD and APHASE ----------------------------------
# Add study specific code as applicable using ADEX or ADSL APxx / PHw  variables

is_basetype <- is_afrlt %>%
  mutate(
    APERIOD = 1,
    APERIODC = "Period 01",
    APHASE = NA_character_,
    APHASEN = NA_integer_,
    BASETYPE = "DOUBLE_BLINDED"
  )
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  is_basetype,
  display_vars = exprs(
    USUBJID, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, DRUG, VISIT, NFRLT, AFRLT
  )
)
```

## Derive Assigned Variables {#assigned}

At this step, we assign `MRT` (Minimum Reportable Titer) and an Optional
`DTL` (both are user/protocol specific assigned values). `RESULTC` is the
the standard interpreted result (`POSITIVE` or `NEGATIVE`) based values found
in `IS.ISSTRESC` (these values will be sponsor specific as applicable, starter
values supplied to demonstrate.). `RESULTN` is assigned `0`/`1` as the numeric version for `RESULTC`.

> RESULTN and RESULTC are pre-cursors to AVAL and AVALC and serve as interim stores

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`RESULTN` and `RESULTC` are pre-cursors to `AVAL` and `AVALC` and serve as interim stores
```

is_result_change <- is_aval_change %>%
  derive_var_base(
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM),
    source_var = RESULTN,
    new_var = BASE_RESULT,
    filter = ABLFL == "Y"
  )

# Get base only data for use later
base_data <- is_result_change %>%
  filter(ABLFL == "Y") %>%
  select(
    STUDYID, USUBJID, DRUG, BASETYPE, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, BASE_RESULT, BASE,
    ABLFL
  )
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  is_result_change,
  display_vars = exprs(
    USUBJID, ADATYPE, ADAPARM, VISIT, NFRLT, RESULTN, RESULTC, AVAL, AVALC, ABLFL, 
    BASE, CHG, BASE_RESULT
  )
)
```

This section computes main ADA analyte parameters into a horizontal dataset.
Sections are commented appropriately. 
Final Key Variables this section:
Subject By Visit analysis variables (sponsor or molecule specific or optional)
TFLAGV - By visit Treatment Emergent Category (see *T-Flags).
PBFLAGV - Post-Baseline Status by Visit
ADASTATV - Overall ADA Status by Visit (ADA Positive or Negative)
Subject Overall analysis variables
BFLAG  - Baseline Positive/Negative Flag
TFLAG  - Overall Treatment Emergent Category  (see *T-Flags)
PBFLAG  - Post-Baseline Status

> ADASTAT - Overall Subject ADA Status (ADA Positive or Negative)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`TFLAGV` - By visit Treatment Emergent Category (see *T-Flags).
`PBFLAGV` - Post-Baseline Status by Visit
`ADASTATV` - Overall ADA Status by Visit (ADA Positive or Negative)
Subject Overall analysis variables
`BFLAG`  - Baseline Positive/Negative Flag
`TFLAG`  - Overall Treatment Emergent Category  (see *T-Flags)
`PBFLAG`  - Post-Baseline Status
`ADASTAT` - Overall Subject ADA Status (ADA Positive or Negative)
```

        (BFLAG == 0 | is.na(BFLAG)) & RESULT_P == 0 ~ 0,
        (BFLAG == 0 | is.na(BFLAG)) & RESULT_P == 1 ~ 1,
        BFLAG == 1 & (MAXCHG >= 0.6) ~ 2,
        BFLAG == 1 & !is.na(MAXCHG) & (MAXCHG < 0.6) ~ 3,
        BFLAG == 1 & is.na(MAXCHG) & RESULT_P == 0 ~ 3,
        TRUE ~ NA_integer_
      ),
    PBFLAG =
      case_when(
        ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & (TFLAG == 1 | TFLAG == 2) ~ 1,
        ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & (TFLAG == 0 | TFLAG == 3) ~ 0,
        ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & RESULT_P == 0 ~ 0,
        ADATYPE == "ADA_NAB" & RESULT_P == 1 ~ 1,
        TRUE ~ NA_integer_
      ),
    ADASTAT = case_when(
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & PBFLAG == 1 ~ 1,
      ADATYPE == "ADA_BAB" & PBFLAG == 0 ~ 0,
      TRUE ~ NA_integer_
    )
  )
```

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE}
dataset_vignette(
  flagdata_init
)
```

In this section, we compute Neutralizing Antibody (Nab) Status (optional and if applicable).
Nab is typically obtained from samples where the subject has positive finding for its 
parent main analyte. Reminder that ADA and Nab are drug specific. Drug ABC can have ADA
and optional Nab tests; Drug XYZ can also have the same pairs and are processed separately.

> The target variable for Nab is NABSTAT (subject Nab Status for the the matching parent analyte)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The target variable for Nab is `NABSTAT` (subject Nab Status for the the matching parent analyte)
```

In the example template, to be `NABSTAT = "Positive" or "Negative"`, the subject has to 
`ADATAT="Positive"` on the main parent matching analyte. If not `ADASTAT  = "Positive"`, `NABSTAT`

> is set to either NA or 'MISSING" as desired.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is set to either NA or "MISSING" as desired.
```

  )
)
```

In this section, compute or merge in any additional flags or `ADSL` variables.

## Add ADSL variables {#adsl_vars}

```{r message=FALSE}
# Merge in ADSL Values --------------------------------
adab_adsl <- adab_study %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID)
  )

# Compute COHORT From ADSL, other source could be ADSUB
adab_cohort <- adab_adsl %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(COHORT = ARMCD),
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID)
  )

# Compute ADAFL
# Other method could be ADSL.SAFFL, ADAB.ADPBLPFL by ISTESTCD, etc.
adab_adafl <- adab_cohort %>%
  derive_vars_merged(
    dataset_add = adsl,
    new_vars = exprs(ADAFL = SAFFL),
    by_vars = exprs(STUDYID, USUBJID)
  )
```

In this section we create a Tibble to map above `PARAMCD` and `PARAM` to final study spec values.
This step is important as we want unique `PARAMCD`/`PARAM` values. The number suffixes start 
with '1' and increment as the core parameter name is repeated. This could be due to having
`RESULT` for ADA and Nab for Drug ABC. There could be two analytes/drug combos 

> (ISBDAGNT is 'XANOMELINE' and ISBDAGNT is 'Y012345678').

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(`ISBDAGNT` is "XANOMELINE" and `ISBDAGNT` is "Y012345678").
```

> After merging the 'adab_param_data', final adjustments are made to PARAMCD and PARAM values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After merging the `adab_param_data`, final adjustments are made to `PARAMCD` and `PARAM` values.
```

    ABLFL, ADABLPFL, ADPBLPFL, ADAFL
  )
```

# Add Labels and Attributes {#attributes}

Adding labels and attributes for SAS transport files is supported by the
following packages:

-   [metacore](https://atorus-research.github.io/metacore/): establish a
    common foundation for the use of metadata within an R session.

-   [metatools](https://pharmaverse.github.io/metatools/): enable the
    use of metacore objects. Metatools can be used to build datasets or
    enhance columns in existing datasets as well as checking datasets
    against the metadata.

-   [xportr](https://atorus-research.github.io/xportr/): functionality
    to associate all metadata information to a local R data frame,
    perform data set level validation checks and convert into a
    [transport v5
    file(xpt)](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.5/movefile/n1xbwdre0giahfn11c99yjkpi2yb.htm).

NOTE: All these packages are in the experimental phase, but the vision
is to have them associated with an End to End pipeline under the
umbrella of the [pharmaverse](https://github.com/pharmaverse). An
example of applying metadata and perform associated checks can be found
at the [pharmaverse E2E

> example](https://pharmaverse.github.io/examples/adam/adsl).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Add Labels and Attributes {#attributes}

Note that attributes may not be preserved in some cases after processing
with `{admiral}`. The recommended approach is to apply variable labels
and other metadata as a final step in your data derivation process using
packages like:

-   [metacore](https://atorus-research.github.io/metacore/): establish a
    common foundation for the use of metadata within an R session.

-   [metatools](https://pharmaverse.github.io/metatools/): enable the
    use of metacore objects. Metatools can be used to build datasets or
    enhance columns in existing datasets as well as checking datasets
    against the metadata.

-   [xportr](https://atorus-research.github.io/xportr/): functionality
    to associate all metadata information to a local R data frame,
    perform data set level validation checks and convert into a
    [transport v5
    file(xpt)](https://documentation.sas.com/doc/en/pgmsascdc/9.4_3.5/movefile/n1xbwdre0giahfn11c99yjkpi2yb.htm).

NOTE: Together with `{admiral}` these packages comprise an End to End
pipeline under the umbrella of the [pharmaverse](https://github.com/pharmaverse). An
example of applying metadata and perform associated checks can be found
at the [pharmaverse E2E
example](https://pharmaverse.github.io/examples/adam/adsl).

```
